In order to make an investment decision, we will need to familiarize ourselves with the four basic rules that are applied in this process
The first rule is related to the pure given value, abbreviated as NPV
Next, the Internal Revenue Rate, IRR
Next, the profitability index and the period of purchase
The last two parameters are familiar to us from the standard procedures of the economic analysis of the enterprise
But they are used with an amendment to the discount
The first two, NPV and IRR, are entirely and completely built on the model of assessing the value of a financial asset
We will also consider a couple of points in this section, but more on that later
So, the pure given value, abbreviated as NPV, is the difference between the discounted investments in the project and the discounted cash flows from the project
Remember, when we work in the standard economy, when we operate with accounting, we take the expenses per nominal and the income per nominal, and find the difference
In our case, we use the expenses and income in the same way, but only after the discount
So, if you discount, returning to the example of determining your value
If you discount all your expenses that you will have to make in the next year, and all your income that you will have to get in the next year
You will get two numbers, then subtract the expenses from the income, you will get a difference, either positive or negative
And this will be evidence that you have income for this year, or vice versa, you do not have it and you will be in debt to someone
Let's go back to our slide. The rules of using NPV
You can accept a project for execution, for financing, if the NPV is greater than zero
You can, if you have several projects, accept a project for execution, whose NPV is the largest
These are simple rules
But I would like to ask you a question. What if the NPV project is zero?
Should you accept such a project for execution, if there are no others?
There are situations when such a project can be accepted for execution. Why?
Because thanks to such a project, you can save your capital
Your capital will not decrease, but it will not grow. It will remain at the same level, and this is already an achievement
You were able to save it over the past year, not lose it
So in some cases, a project with a zero NPV can be accepted
At the same time, I will draw your attention to the fact that a project with a zero NPV will certainly have an accounting profit
Let's look at a more detailed example. The following slide shows the calculations
So, the investment in the project is 100 units
Let's assume that these investments are made at once, at the current time
They do not need to be discounted. At the current time. We do this to make the example easier
The project is designed for 5 years, and its cash flows are 20, 20, 20, 30 and 30 units
If we add them up by the nominal, we get a profit of 120 minus 100, the income is certainly higher than the expenses
The discount rate is 10%, in other words, the market value of the resources is 10%
Then we substitute everything in the formula. NPV, we take the investment in the project with a minus sign, because it is the cash flow
Everything else we take with a plus sign, because it is the inflow of cash
Please note that the discount rate is not in percents, but in dollars
So, if we calculate by this formula, for example, a computer or Excel can do it very quickly
Then we get that NPV is equal to, look, the second line
20 units of income received a year later today cost us 18 kopecks
20 units of income received two years later today cost us 16 kopecks
Then 15 and income of 30 units per year we turn into today's 20 and 18
If we add them all up, we get only 88, almost 89 units
This is not enough to get to zero NPV, we get a negative NPV
In fact, if we take up the implementation of this project, and even if we successfully implement it, we will incur a financial loss of 11 units
This is an absolute value
In the absence of other information, we can say that this project should be rejected
The next rule is related to the so-called period of payback
This is a period that is required to reimburse investment, but taking into account the discounting procedure
Let's look at an example, it is shown on the slide
The same initial 100 units of investment, the same 5 years for which the project is designed
If we take the already discounted cash flows, let them be equal to 25, 25, 25, 25 and 30
4 times 25, the last year 30 units
And check the NPV, yes, there are 30 units
Now about the period of payback, our initial 100 units will pay off exactly in the first 4 years
There is no formula, everything is quite obvious
You add up the cash flows until the amount does not exceed the initial investment
If our investment amount was not 100 units, but 110, what would be the period of payback?
Now the answer
In order to get the required amount of 110 units, we will have to wait 4 years
25, 25, 25, 25, 100, and we need 110
4 years with the last 5 years will bring us 30 units of income
We need to get 10 more units of income to pay back the investment
Therefore, it is 1 third of the amount
Thus, we can say that the period of payback in this case will be 4.1 years
The next rule is the use of the profitability index
The profitability index is almost the same as the NPV, but expressed in percents
If we found a difference between the investment in the project and the income from the project
In this case, we need to find the relationship between the two amounts
You can see an example here
If the income from the project is 130 units, our investment in the project is 100 units
The profitability index gives us 130%
The rule of application is very simple
If the index is greater than 1, we accept the project, if it is less, we reject it
If it is greater than 1, it means that the NPV is greater than 0
If it is less than 1, it means that the NPV is less than 0
There are situations when you compare different projects, but with different amounts
The profitability index allows you to move away from absolute numbers and move to relative numbers
Now about the internal profitability rate
This is the next slide
It is quite interesting and the moment when many people start to get confused
Although there is nothing complicated there
The internal profitability rate is a percentage rate
In which the NPV of the project is 0
Of course, it should be a project with a positive NPV
Then the internal profitability rate will be positive
The internal profitability rate cannot be negative
Any percentage rate cannot be negative
Look at the slide
At the formula that is written there
You see that the example with an investment project
Where we have 100 units of investments
And for the first 4 years and the last 30 years
Our cash flows
What about the indicators?
The indicators have the same value
IRR
Unfortunately, there is no mathematical formula to calculate IRR
The easiest way is to find this rate in the computer
For example, IRR is 9.0%
This means that at the cost of resources on the market
At the cost of money
9.0%
9.18%
Your project will have a zero NPV
But if you have a rate that you can discount
A rate at which you attract money
Or a rate at which you must work
Less than 6%
7%
Then you will definitely have a positive NPV
So, if IRR
Internal profitability rate
This is the rule
If IRR is more profitable
More market profitability
Or required profitability
The project can be accepted
We can also say that IRR is a kind of indicator of the project's strength, reliability, and stability
It is a kind of a reserve of the project's strength
The greater the difference between IRR and market profitability
The more stable your project will be in the future
The more reliable your project will be in the future
We make investment decisions
We are forced to predict the future, which is not determined
Therefore, the more stable the project is in relation to the risk of changing the interest rate in the future
The better
Therefore, when making a decision, you must focus
When making a decision, when choosing investment projects
You must focus on the NPV, its absolute value
The period of profitability
The profitability index
And IRR
All these parameters together
Will give you information
About how profitable this project is
How much it will increase capital
How quickly it will pay off
And how stable it will be in the future
Each of these parameters should not be used separately
Only together
Another question arises
Since IRR and NPV intersect in something
Which of these two parameters is better?
Can't we use one parameter to assess the investment project?
Why use a lot?
There are such situations, there are such questions
What is better?
The absolute value of NPV or the relative value of IRR?
The question is controversial, there is no definite answer
But here we need to clarify
That IRR, unlike NPV, is a capricious lady
And has its nuances
Before we talk about these nuances
It should be clarified that there are different types of money flows
And depending on the type, there can be nuances related to IRR
There are three main types of money flows
Traditional money flow
This is, look at the next slide
Traditional money flow, borrowed money flow
And several types of non-traditional money flows
Let's start with the traditional
Traditional money flow
It means that you spent money at first
That is, you have a flow at first
And then every period you have a flow of money
Borrowed type of money flows
It assumes that you have attracted resources from somewhere
And then you spend them gradually every period
Finally, non-traditional is a combination of the first two
But in a situation where over time
Your money flows change signs
That is, today you invested money, it is a flow
Then you had inflows for three years in a row
And then, for example, in 2004 you had some problems
You have a flow of money resources
And then again an inflow
It will be a non-traditional money flow
And it leads to the fact that you have not one IRR, but two
Oddly enough
So, what do money flows look like?
The next slide shows us what a traditional money flow looks like
Pay attention, with the growth of profitability, the NPV is reduced
This is quite natural
With the growth of profitability, the NPV is reduced
And IRR, you see, is the point where the line of our project intersects with the horizontal axis
The money flow of the borrowed type is the reverse line
By the way, the lines may not necessarily be curved
The project line can be straight
So it's just a drawing
NPV, in this picture you see, grows with the growth of profitability
This is a money flow of the borrowed type
Finally, a non-traditional money flow
One of its varieties
In this case, it is a borrowed money flow
You see that with the growth of profitability, the NPV grows
Then comes the moment, the point of X-interruption
After which, with the growth of profitability, the NPV begins to fall
In this case, we will have two IRR in the project
In principle, the maximum number of IRR is the number of times that the money flows change the sign from positive to negative or vice versa
It is obvious that with the multiplicity of IRR in the project, its use is not purposeful
There is nothing to talk about
But if for some reason you want to have this parameter
You can do the calculation and get rid of negative money flows
And thus bring your project to the traditional or borrowed type
How can this be done?
Let's look at the next two slides
So, this will be an example of a calculation
We have a project in which we spend 100 units in the first year
Then in the second year we get 60 units of income
Then we get 70 units of income
And in the last year, for some reason, we have a flow of money in the amount of 10 units
In other words, some additional investment
What does this mean?
This means that we will have two IRR
But not very good
How can we get rid of this?
To do this, you need to get rid of minus 10 units
From the sum where we have minus 10 units
To do this, you need to bring minus 10 units of the money flow of the fourth year
To the form comparable to the money flows of the third year
And in the next slide you will see how we do it
Pay attention
Minus 10 units is money from the fourth year
You can get rid of them if you compare them to the third year
The next year, the fourth
So, what are we doing for this?
We must discount minus 10 units for one year
We discounted minus 10 units, we got, for example, minus 8 units
This is not a principal value, but for example, minus 8
Then our formula for determining NPV will look like this
Two last sums, 70 remains unchanged
1 plus R to the third degree
But the fourth sum has already changed its appearance
This is minus 8, 1 plus R to the third degree
The third and fourth sums are comparable
They can be reduced
As a result of the reduction, 70 minus 8 remains 62
Thus, pay attention
We got a formula, we got a new money flow, so to speak
In which there are minus 100 units of spending at the moment
During the current year
And two positive money flows for the next two years
This is the equivalent of the money flow that we considered at the beginning
Namely, 60 after 2 years, 70 after 3, minus 10 after 4
Thus, we got rid of the minus and brought our calculation to the traditional money flow
Now we will have one NPR, it can be used
One more nuance
To discuss it, we will return to the CIPM and VACC model
It would seem, if we know the profitability of our project
10%
Then you can calculate VACC
And depending on the capital expenditure
Say if this income is suitable for us or not
For example, our capital expenditures are 12%
12% is our capital expenditure
Our project's profitability is 10%
In theory, it seems that we should refuse it
But this is not the right approach
We can't say it without an operation
First of all, because VACC does not take into account the risk factor
There are no elements of discounting
Pay attention to the next slide
It shows two lines
The first horizontal line shows us the VACC rate
It does not change depending on the project's risk
In this case, the risk of the financial asset is expressed in the beta coefficient
No matter how the risk changes, VACC remains unchanged
At the same time, the calculation of the CIPM model
This is the second horizontal line, it is called SML
The CIPM model shows us how the risk and profitability of the financial asset are related
Now, pay attention to the gray field on the right
It says, a non-profitable project
If there is a dot with the word non-profitable project
If there is the profitability and risk of our project
Then it turns out to be an interesting picture
The profitability of our project is higher than the VACC value
It would seem that we should accept it
But no, such a project should not be accepted
Only because it is higher than VACC
The fact is that it is less than the CIPM
Which takes into account the ratio of risk and profit
In other words, with this value of risk, which is marked with a dot
Under the name of a non-profitable project
With this value of risk, the profitability should be much higher
Having passed this project, we take on a high risk of non-profitability
The other field is on the left, also a gray field
It is marked with the inscription, a profitable project
If we take a project located in this area
It certainly gives less profitability than VACC
It would seem that we should refuse it
But this is not true
The fact is that this project, with the level of risk it has
Has much more profitability than it should be, according to the logic of things
This is a profitable project, and such a project should be accepted
We have disassembled the basic rules of assessing investment projects
I remind you that the assessment of investment projects is mainly a decision
To accept the project for investment or not to accept it
There are four main parameters
This is NPV, the net value
IRR, the internal income rate
And also two parameters that use the element of discounting
This is the term of the purchase and the profitability index
These are the basic parameters
We also considered the situation related to the multiplicity of the internal income rate
And the interaction of the CAPM and VACC models
I hope you remember what we talked about
I would ask you to get distracted from the video course
And solve the tasks that are presented in the work conspect
And then we will move on to the next topic
Which is related to some nuances of decision-making
We continue
Now I am addressing people who are in the topic
We move on to study how our basic rules, our basic logic
Can affect the adoption of certain current decisions
For example, decisions in the part of the financial, in the part of the borrowing policy
For example, in the part of the policy of balance sheets
For example, in the part of the selection of sales volumes
You can also talk about the credit policy
Whether to provide or not to provide commercial credit to your partner
You can also talk about the choice of the device
Most suitable from a financial point of view for this project
So, we will start this section with a question that sounds like this
Which borrowing policy within the horizon of planning is better?
There are two options
The first option means that you attract long-term borrowing funds
In the maximum volume
That is, in such a maximum volume that covers all your needs with a surplus
In this case, when you have free funds, and they will be most of the time
In this case, you are temporarily free resources, invest in high-liquid financial assets
Maybe the second option
When you attract long-term investments at a minimum
And at the time when you have a need for borrowing funds
And it will almost always arise, that is, there will be a certain shortage
In this case, you will attract short-term borrowing resources from the market
Both of these policies are reflected in the following two slides
Pay attention, the policy of maximum
That is, when you attract resources in the maximum volume
So, the amount and time are reflected in this graph
I mean the need for investment
It is more, then less, more, then less
There is a certain peak, you can attract long-term financing at this peak
All that is less than this peak, but higher than the needs of your project
These are temporarily free funds that you need to do something with
They need to be invested in high-liquid resources
The following graph shows us the policy of the minimum
It means that you choose a minimum limit from your investment needs
And on this minimum limit you attract long-term borrowing funds
But all that will be higher, pay attention
Except for one case, in all other cases on the graph
You will need to attract additional borrowing funds
These will be short-term, for example, bank loans
The choice of two policies, which one to choose
The policy of maximum or policy of minimum
Depends on the cost of these resources
On your costs for these resources
Here the recommendation can be only in words
You need to calculate the costs for one policy, the costs for the second policy
Keep in mind that in the first case, the policy of maximum
You will also have a profit from reinvesting in temporary funds
Somewhere between these two policies will be the golden mean
Where you need to choose by the method of selection
How, taking into account your costs for borrowing funds and repayment from them
I draw your attention to the fact that you will have a certain gap in interest rates
Namely, the interest rates on which you will invest
Will differ from the interest rates on which you will attract, even short-term resources
And the last thing on this topic
Why do we generally divide long-term investment and short-term?
Why do we highlight two policies?
The fact is that, I think it should also be obvious to you
That the interest rate on long-term resources
And the interest rate on short-term resources
Are different from each other
Due to the fact that there is less risk in short-term loans
Therefore, the interest rate there should theoretically be lower than in the long-term
The next point is related to the management of balance sheets
The basic question that sounds here is the following
What should be the desired level of money on the accounts?
This intersects with the previous question regarding the choice of financing policy
There are a number of models that suggest you calculate
What should be the recommended balance sheet balance
Please note that here and in the Work Consultation
There is a set of formulas that you can use in your work
I will only add one point
I will not comment on the formula, it is quite obvious
I will only add the following
It makes sense to determine the time when you have a profit or a deficit of funds
After you determine this, discount them all
Calculate their given value
Determine the NPV, the NPV analog for the deficit and the proficit of funds on the account
Then you will find out, in general, on the horizon of planning
Do you have excess or lack of resources?
If you break this period into separate parts, you will see when you need to create a reserve
If you have a deficit ahead
Or there is an opportunity to invest resources if you have a profit of financial resources ahead
In any case, the general approach is the same as in the previous item
You discount the deficit and the proficit and try to find the NPV analog
If you consider these two points preparatory, then now it's more interesting
More interesting is called providing or not providing a loan to a client
This is a topic that concerns all enterprises without exception
Many times enterprises face the fact that the client asks for a loan for some reason
And sometimes the client leaves without receiving a loan
Sometimes, after receiving a loan, the client is so happy that he buys more or becomes a regular client
Let's consider two situations related to credit policy
For both situations, we will have some general parameters
Please pay attention to the slide related to credit policy
We will have several variables
The first is the price of the product
We will take the figure of 35 units for calculation
The price of the product is the digit P
V is the variable costs
The letter P is the probability that the client will not pay it after receiving the loan
I repeat again
This is the probability that the client will not pay it after receiving the loan
And finally, R is the profitability
Let's look at the debitor's debt
The first situation
The client will buy only if he receives a loan
This is a tough situation
Otherwise, he will refuse
What does the company have in this case?
It has two situations
In the first situation, it has two ways to develop the event
The first is that the company refuses to provide a loan to the client
who wants only a loan, otherwise he will refuse
The company refuses
In this case, it has no increase in cash flows
Everything is zero
The second situation is when the company goes to meet this client and gives him a loan
In this case, the company spends only the variable costs
but plans to get a certain amount of cash flow in return
Pay attention to the slide
The cash flow is 1-P multiplied by the price of the product
Again, 1-P multiplied by the price of the product
This is the calculated amount of cash flow that the company will receive from the client
given that the client may not pay
We have a probability that the client will not pay in the amount of P
I repeat again
If the company gives a loan, it risks its variable costs
but in return, it receives a price of the product multiplied by 1-P
This is the calculated revenue from this client
Now, if we put all these numbers together, we can build a formula
Pay attention to the slide
The logic is the same as everywhere
NPV is the difference between income and expenses
Our expenses are the current variable costs
They go with a minus sign
Minus V
Plus
Next is the discounted payment
I repeat again
This is a one-time client who will refuse to buy if he is not given a loan
but may not pay
So, a one-time client who pays us money for this deal
In the end, the NPV of this decision
whether to give him a loan or not
looks like this
If we use the numbers we had
we get the line that says NPV is equal to minus 15 and so on
If we take a 30% number
Let's say 30% of clients do not pay even after receiving a loan
They refuse to pay
30% of clients are not reliable
Even in this case, the NPV of this decision will be greater than 0
So, if you give a loan
often enough
to consider it a statistically significant action
then even with 30% of non-payers
you will still have a positive flow of resources
This decision will be correct
By the way, to fix this moment
you can pause now and calculate
Try to determine at what value of Pi
that is, the number of non-payers
at what value of Pi the NPV will be zero
That is, above what value of Pi
non-payers cannot give a loan
Please, calculate